Javid Abdul MIM he is in uh the Gaza
medical team leader for doctors with our
borders he's with us from kanun in Gaza
many thanks for joining the program the
last week as we've been hearing has been
one of the deadliest in Gaza since the
War Began nearly 500 people killed in
the last 10 days the pressure on medical
facilities must be immense you've been
treating patients at Nasa Hospital in
kanun can you tell us what you've
seen M thank you for having me uh in the
last uh 3 4 days since Saturday we've
had two Mass casualties at the NASA
medical complex in the emergency room
msf we run a 64 bed uh trauma unit with
two operating theaters so of course
we're invested in in in helping to
manage the emergency room with the mass
casualty events uh the the event on
Saturday was exceeded any capacity that
any health system the best of the world
could uh could manage and that's not
talking about the fact that we are on
our knees
we we were dripping in blood at the end
of it the first case I saw was a
three-year-old girl with her thigh uh
peeled off her bone uh the second case I
saw was a woman covered in dust uh she
looked at me she was breathing it meant
that she's globally okay but I took down
the dressing on her belly and her a
piece of abdomen a piece of bow was out
and then suddenly a rush of healthcare
workers fully dressed uh first aid
responders in their uniform all injured
it was so shocking to see healthcare
workers injured in this way um uh and
then I looked across at my nurse and and
they were helping manage the airway of a
boy that looked about 13 or 14 and she
looked at me and and in a mass casualty
if you have to manage the airway you
have to call that person dead he was a
boy none of us had the heart to call him
dead and then the next one came in the
next one came in and there were no beds
and you're kneeling on the floor and you
can feel your knee is wet with blood and
you have to quickly decide who's more
urgent and who's not this man looks like
he has a brain injury he has to be left
um for Dead uh this woman has her knee
almost blown off take her straight to
operating theaters very quickly uh all
eight operating theaters in NASA medical
uh complex were
all the uh surgeons that were available
were operating I still had two critical
cases in the resuscitation room still
surrounded by hundreds of patients in
the yellow and green
zone we had to try and send these
patients somewhere one we kept with us
waiting to go to the OT the other we
sent to one of the local field hospitals
even though he was unstable and
shouldn't be moved I know that both
those patients died this is in the
context of looking up can I just say
looking up in middle of managing all
these patients and I saw my anaus
colleague there and I was I said what
why are you in here what's happened and
he said I've just found out my house got
destroyed and my family is in here
somewhere and he subsequently found out
that his nephew was killed and his two
daughters were injured but thankfully
alive and this was a strike in the soall
humanitarian Zone on Saturday uh it it
just goes to show that nowhere is safe
and before mine before we even had a
chance just to absorb what had happened
the next morning we got a call from my
nursing colleague in our clinic in Gaza
City saying that his house had been
destroyed and two of his three children
were killed and his remaining child and
wife were injured um it does it does
carry on sorry clearly you are dealing
with nonstop injuries from the non-stop
targeting of the Israeli bombing and so
on but are you also treating uh disease
malnutrition how many cases of those are
you seeing because increasingly we are
hearing about the the problems related
to sanitation and so on uh are also
causing a lot of
deaths there are um severe problems to
do with sanitation water and sanitation
and hygiene uh uh diseases and illnesses
related to poor conditions for Hygiene
feature High the top three or four
condition out of five in the primary
health care centers that we run as msf
throughout um the middle area
andus uh have skin infections diarrheal
infections eye infections and scab
infestation and those are classic water
and sanitation hygiene related illnesses
so that tells you that the response the
facilities the provision of soap clean
water latrines are are simply inadequate
in this small area with regards to
malnutrition we are running a severe
acute malnutrition therapeutic feeding
Center in Naser it is permanently full
it is only of four beds we haven't seen
what we would classify as a critical and
emergency thresholds of man nutrition
but the more vulnerable children people
children with disabilities and other
chronic conditions are the children that
we're seeing come in with severe acute
malnutrition and Dr NASA hospital was
once the largest working Hospital in
southern Gaza it's it's not been
functional as a proper hospital since
February of this year given that how
challenging is it to treat patients I
mean what are the biggest difficulties
you are facing is it the lack of
medicines is it the lack of equipment is
it the lack of
electricity Meen it's all of the above
so given that nowhere is safe there are
mass casualties seriously we had another
one yesterday in the so-called
humanitarian Zone uh we're operating in
a context where fuel is not enough so
that for example when NASA has to ration
its Fuel and switch to a smaller
generator we don't get water pumped to
the uh inpatient Department the 64 beds
that we have the operating theaters one
Saturday last week we had no water
across the whole department until 2 p.m.
uh it means that they ration uh the air
conditioning and that sounds like it's a
frivolity but of course it's not when
you have surgeons in this heat sweating
into what should be a sterile field you
have to cancel theaters so that they can
cool down and and prevent uh infection
uh our supplies have been uh minimally
low we haven't had the supplies that we
need so I've had to reduce the frequency
of dressing changes for our Burns
patients rather than doing every 2 or 3
days since June we've been doing it
every 3 or 4 days it um absolutely
essential medications for things like
sedation fentanyl there's an internal
Market Bar bartering that we have every
day my Pharmacy manager with other NOS I
was running I was within a week of
rupturing fenil we need it for Sedation
we need it for anesthesia we had an
excess of sutures I did a swap with
another NGO we're right now having
surgical gowns tailored because we don't
have surgical gowns we ruptured in
examination gloves how how can you
examine p patients without gloves on so
this is just to show that we don't have
enough supplies to do the work that we
need to do add that add to that mass
casualties add to that fuel and and
cutting of water and so forth it really
uh need to get out there the idea that
the health system here is is on its
knees we have in our pediatric
department in NASA two to three children
per bed there aren't enough mattresses
for the beds there aren't enough beds
for the numbers of patients the system
is is beyond what it should be doing and
it is detri menting the health of
patients thank you so much for your time
and uh given the challenges you are
facing thanks for talking to us on
aljazera Dr Javid Abdul Nim uh the Gaza
medical team for Doctors Without Borders
thank
you make sure to subscribe to our
channel to get the latest news from Al
jazer